# Using custom Keycloak images - Keycloak

# Using custom Keycloak images

## Keycloak custom image with the Operator

With the Keycloak Custom Resource (CR), you can specify a custom container image for the Keycloak server.
To ensure full compatibility of Operator and Operand,
make sure that the version of Keycloak release used in the custom image is aligned with the version of the operator.

### Best practice

When using the default Keycloak image, the server will perform a costly re-augmentation every time a Pod starts.
To avoid this delay, you can provide a custom image with the augmentation built-in from the build time of the image.
With a custom image, you can also specify the Keycloak build-time configurations and extensions during the build of the container.
When using the optimized custom image, health-enabled and metrics-enabled options need to be explicitly set in the Containerfile.
For instructions on how to build such an image, see Running Keycloak in a container .

### Providing a custom Keycloak image

To provide a custom image, you define the image field in the Keycloak CR as shown in this example:
With custom images, every build time option passed either through a dedicated field or the additionalOptions is ignored.
The Operator is unaware of any configuration options that are specified in a custom image.
Use the Keycloak CR for any configuration that requires Operator awareness, namely the TLS and HTTP(S) settings reflected when configuring services and probes.

### Non-optimized custom image

While it is considered a best practice to use a pre-augmented image, if you want to use a non-optimized custom image or build time properties with an augmented image that is still possible. You just need set the startOptimized field to false as shown in this example:
Keep in mind this will incur the re-augmentation cost on every start.

---
Quelle: https://www.keycloak.org/operator/customizing-keycloak