# Root cause analysis with tracing - Keycloak

# Root cause analysis with tracing

This guide explains how you can enable and configure distributed tracing in Keycloak by utilizing OpenTelemetry (OTel).
Tracing allows for detailed monitoring of each request’s lifecycle, which helps quickly identify and diagnose issues, leading to more efficient debugging and maintenance.
It provides valuable insights into performance bottlenecks and can help optimize the system’s overall efficiency and across system boundaries.
Keycloak uses a supported Quarkus OTel extension that provides smooth integration and exposure of application traces.

## Enable tracing

It is possible to enable exposing traces using the build time option tracing-enabled as follows:
By default, the trace exporters send out data in batches, using the gRPC protocol and endpoint http://localhost:4317 .
The default service name is keycloak , specified via the tracing-service-name property, which takes precedence over service.name defined in the tracing-resource-attributes property.
For more information about resource attributes that can be provided via the tracing-resource-attributes property, see the Quarkus OpenTelemetry Resource guide.
Tracing can be enabled only when the opentelemetry feature is enabled (by default).
For more tracing settings, see all possible configurations below.

## Development setup

In order to see the captured Keycloak traces, the basic setup with leveraging the Jaeger tracing platform might be used.
For development purposes, the Jaeger-all-in-one can be used to see traces as easily as possible.
Jaeger-all-in-one includes the Jaeger agent, an OTel collector, and the query service/UI.
You do not need to install a separate collector, as you can directly send the trace data to Jaeger.

### Exposed ports

OpenTelemetry Protocol gRPC receiver (default)
OpenTelemetry Protocol HTTP receiver
You can visit the Jaeger UI on http://localhost:16686/ to see the tracing information.
The Jaeger UI might look like this with an arbitrary Keycloak trace:

## Information in traces

Keycloak creates spans for the following activities:
- Incoming HTTP requests
Incoming HTTP requests
- Outgoing Database including acquiring a database connections
Outgoing Database including acquiring a database connections
- Outgoing LDAP requests including connecting to the LDAP server
Outgoing LDAP requests including connecting to the LDAP server
- Outgoing HTTP requests including IdP brokerage
Outgoing HTTP requests including IdP brokerage
Keycloak adds tags to traces depending on the type of the request. All tags are prefixed with kc. .
Example tags are:
User session ID
id as mentioned in the token
issuer as mentioned in the token
sid as mentioned in the token
Authentication session ID
Authentication Tab ID
If a trace is being sampled, it will contain any user events created during the request.
This includes, for example, LOGIN , LOGOUT or REFRESH_TOKEN events with all details and IDs found in user events.
LDAP communication errors are shown as log entries in recorded traces as well with a stack trace and details of the failed operation.

## Trace IDs in logs

When tracing is enabled, the trace IDs are included in the log messages of all enabled log handlers (see more in Configuring logging ).
It can be useful for associating log events to request execution, which might provide better traceability and debugging.
All log lines originating from the same request will have the same traceId in the log.
The log message also contains a sampled flag, which relates to the sampling described below and indicates whether the span was sampled - sent to the collector.
The format of the log records may start as follows:

### Hide trace IDs in logs

You can hide trace IDs in specific log handlers by specifying their associated Keycloak option log-<handler-name>-include-trace , where <handler-name> is the name of the log handler.
For instance, to disable trace info in the console log, you can turn it off as follows:
When you explicitly override the log format for the particular log handlers, the *-include-trace options do not have any effect, and no tracing is included.
The sampler decides whether a trace should be discarded or forwarded, effectively reducing overhead by limiting the number of collected traces sent to the collector.
It helps manage resource consumption, which leads to avoiding the huge storage costs of tracing every single request and potential performance penalty.
For a production-ready environment, sampling should be properly set to minimize infrastructure costs.
Keycloak supports several built-in OpenTelemetry samplers, such as:
- traceidratio (default)
traceidratio (default)
- parentbased_always_on
parentbased_always_on
- parentbased_always_off
parentbased_always_off
- parentbased_traceidratio
parentbased_traceidratio
The used sampler can be changed via the tracing-sampler-type property.

### Default sampler

The default sampler for Keycloak is traceidratio , which controls the rate of trace sampling based on a specified ratio configurable via the tracing-sampler-ratio property.

#### Trace ratio

The default trace ratio is 1.0 , which means all traces are sampled - sent to the collector.
The ratio is a floating number in the range [0,1] .
For instance, when the ratio is 0.1 , only 10% of the traces are sampled.
For a production-ready environment, the trace ratio should be a smaller number to prevent the massive cost of trace store infrastructure and avoid performance overhead.
The ratio can be set to 0.0 to disable sampling entirely at runtime .
The sampler makes its own sampling decisions based on the current ratio of sampled spans, regardless of the decision made on the parent span,
as with using the parentbased_traceidratio sampler.
The parentbased_traceidratio sampler could be the preferred default type as it ensures the sampling consistency between parent and child spans.
Specifically, if a parent span is sampled, all its child spans will be sampled as well - the same sampling decision for all.
It helps to keep all spans together and prevents storing incomplete traces.
However, it might introduce certain security risks leading to DoS attacks.
External callers can manipulate trace headers, parent spans can be injected, and the trace store can be overwhelmed.
Proper HTTP headers (especially tracestate ) filtering and adequate measures of caller trust would need to be assessed.
For more information, see the W3C Trace context document.

## Tracing in Kubernetes environment

When the tracing is enabled when using the Keycloak Operator, certain information about the deployment is propagated to the underlying containers.

### Configuration via Keycloak CR

You can change tracing configuration via Keycloak CR. For more information, see the Advanced configuration .

### Filter traces based on Kubernetes attributes

You can filter out the required traces in your tracing backend based on their tags:
- service.name - Keycloak deployment name
service.name - Keycloak deployment name
- k8s.namespace.name - Namespace
k8s.namespace.name - Namespace
- host.name - Pod name
host.name - Pod name
Keycloak Operator automatically sets the KC_TRACING_SERVICE_NAME and KC_TRACING_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES environment variables for each Keycloak container included in pods it manages.
The KC_TRACING_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES variable always contains (if not overridden) the k8s.namespace.name attribute representing the current namespace.

## Relevant options

log-console-include-trace Include tracing information in the console log. If the log-console-format option is specified, this option has no effect. CLI: --log-console-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_CONSOLE_INCLUDE_TRACE Available only when Console log handler and Tracing is activated
log-console-include-trace
Include tracing information in the console log.
If the log-console-format option is specified, this option has no effect.
CLI: --log-console-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_CONSOLE_INCLUDE_TRACE
Available only when Console log handler and Tracing is activated
true (default), false
true (default), false
log-file-include-trace Include tracing information in the file log. If the log-file-format option is specified, this option has no effect. CLI: --log-file-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_FILE_INCLUDE_TRACE Available only when File log handler and Tracing is activated
log-file-include-trace
Include tracing information in the file log.
If the log-file-format option is specified, this option has no effect.
CLI: --log-file-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_FILE_INCLUDE_TRACE
Available only when File log handler and Tracing is activated
true (default), false
true (default), false
log-syslog-include-trace Include tracing information in the Syslog. If the log-syslog-format option is specified, this option has no effect. CLI: --log-syslog-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_SYSLOG_INCLUDE_TRACE Available only when Syslog handler and Tracing is activated
log-syslog-include-trace
Include tracing information in the Syslog.
If the log-syslog-format option is specified, this option has no effect.
CLI: --log-syslog-include-trace Env: KC_LOG_SYSLOG_INCLUDE_TRACE
Available only when Syslog handler and Tracing is activated
true (default), false
true (default), false
tracing-compression OpenTelemetry compression method used to compress payloads. If unset, compression is disabled. CLI: --tracing-compression Env: KC_TRACING_COMPRESSION Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-compression
OpenTelemetry compression method used to compress payloads.
If unset, compression is disabled.
CLI: --tracing-compression Env: KC_TRACING_COMPRESSION
Available only when Tracing is enabled
gzip , none (default)
gzip , none (default)
tracing-enabled Enables the OpenTelemetry tracing. CLI: --tracing-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_ENABLED Available only when 'opentelemetry' feature is enabled
tracing-enabled
Enables the OpenTelemetry tracing.
CLI: --tracing-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_ENABLED
Available only when 'opentelemetry' feature is enabled
true , false (default)
true , false (default)
tracing-endpoint OpenTelemetry endpoint to connect to. CLI: --tracing-endpoint Env: KC_TRACING_ENDPOINT Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-endpoint
OpenTelemetry endpoint to connect to.
CLI: --tracing-endpoint Env: KC_TRACING_ENDPOINT
Available only when Tracing is enabled
http://localhost:4317 (default)
http://localhost:4317 (default)
tracing-infinispan-enabled Enables the OpenTelemetry tracing for embedded Infinispan. CLI: --tracing-infinispan-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_INFINISPAN_ENABLED Available only when tracing and embedded Infinispan is enabled
tracing-infinispan-enabled
Enables the OpenTelemetry tracing for embedded Infinispan.
CLI: --tracing-infinispan-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_INFINISPAN_ENABLED
Available only when tracing and embedded Infinispan is enabled
true (default), false
true (default), false
tracing-jdbc-enabled Enables the OpenTelemetry JDBC tracing. CLI: --tracing-jdbc-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_JDBC_ENABLED Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-jdbc-enabled
Enables the OpenTelemetry JDBC tracing.
CLI: --tracing-jdbc-enabled Env: KC_TRACING_JDBC_ENABLED
Available only when Tracing is enabled
true (default), false
true (default), false
tracing-protocol OpenTelemetry protocol used for the telemetry data. CLI: --tracing-protocol Env: KC_TRACING_PROTOCOL Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-protocol
OpenTelemetry protocol used for the telemetry data.
CLI: --tracing-protocol Env: KC_TRACING_PROTOCOL
Available only when Tracing is enabled
grpc (default), http/protobuf
grpc (default), http/protobuf
tracing-resource-attributes OpenTelemetry resource attributes present in the exported trace to characterize the telemetry producer. Values in format key1=val1,key2=val2 . For more information, check the Tracing guide. CLI: --tracing-resource-attributes Env: KC_TRACING_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-resource-attributes
OpenTelemetry resource attributes present in the exported trace to characterize the telemetry producer.
Values in format key1=val1,key2=val2 . For more information, check the Tracing guide.
CLI: --tracing-resource-attributes Env: KC_TRACING_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-sampler-ratio OpenTelemetry sampler ratio. Probability that a span will be sampled. Expected double value in interval [0,1]. CLI: --tracing-sampler-ratio Env: KC_TRACING_SAMPLER_RATIO Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-sampler-ratio
OpenTelemetry sampler ratio.
Probability that a span will be sampled. Expected double value in interval [0,1].
CLI: --tracing-sampler-ratio Env: KC_TRACING_SAMPLER_RATIO
Available only when Tracing is enabled
1.0 (default)
1.0 (default)
tracing-sampler-type OpenTelemetry sampler to use for tracing. CLI: --tracing-sampler-type Env: KC_TRACING_SAMPLER_TYPE Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-sampler-type
OpenTelemetry sampler to use for tracing.
CLI: --tracing-sampler-type Env: KC_TRACING_SAMPLER_TYPE
Available only when Tracing is enabled
always_on , always_off , traceidratio (default), parentbased_always_on , parentbased_always_off , parentbased_traceidratio
always_on , always_off , traceidratio (default), parentbased_always_on , parentbased_always_off , parentbased_traceidratio
tracing-service-name OpenTelemetry service name. Takes precedence over service.name defined in the tracing-resource-attributes property. CLI: --tracing-service-name Env: KC_TRACING_SERVICE_NAME Available only when Tracing is enabled
tracing-service-name
OpenTelemetry service name.
Takes precedence over service.name defined in the tracing-resource-attributes property.
CLI: --tracing-service-name Env: KC_TRACING_SERVICE_NAME
Available only when Tracing is enabled
keycloak (default)
keycloak (default)

---
Quelle: https://www.keycloak.org/observability/tracing