# Advanced configuration - Keycloak

# Advanced configuration

## Advanced configuration

This guide describes how to use Custom Resources (CRs) for advanced configuration of your Keycloak deployment.

### Server configuration details

Many server options are exposed as first-class citizen fields in the Keycloak CR. The structure of the CR is based on the configuration structure of Keycloak. For example, to configure the https-port of the server, follow a
similar pattern in the CR and use the httpsPort field. The following example is a complex server configuration; however, it illustrates the relationship between server options and the Keycloak CR:
For a list of options, see the Keycloak CRD. For details on configuring options, see All configuration .

#### Additional options

Some expert server options are unavailable as dedicated fields in the Keycloak CR. The following are examples of omitted fields:
- Fields that require deep understanding of the underlying Keycloak implementation
Fields that require deep understanding of the underlying Keycloak implementation
- Fields that are not relevant to
a Kubernetes
environment
Fields that are not relevant to
a Kubernetes
environment
- Fields for provider configuration because they are dynamic based on the used provider implementation
Fields for provider configuration because they are dynamic based on the used provider implementation
The additionalOptions field of the Keycloak CR enables Keycloak to accept any available configuration in the form of key-value pairs.
You can use this field to include any option that is omitted in the Keycloak CR.
For details on configuring options, see All configuration .
The values can be expressed as plain text strings or Secret object references as shown in this example:
The name format of options defined in this way is identical to the key format of options specified in the configuration file.
 For details on various configuration formats, see Configuring Keycloak .
If you configure mTLS with https-client-auth set to required , this configuration is inherited by the management interface.
If you have not otherwise configured the usage of HTTP for the health endpoints, you will likely want to also set the additionalOption https-management-client-auth to request or none so that a valid client certificate is not required for probe requests.

#### Custom environment variables

You may find a need to set custom environment variables - such as for theme properties or kc.[sh|bat] script variables.
The spec.env field of the Keycloak CR allows you to directly set any environment variable.
Logic in the operator based upon looking for value of a particular setting does not consult spec.env ,
therefore do not use spec.env for anything that has a first-class configuration in the CR or may be specified as an additionalOption .
Here’s an example setting JAVA_OPTS_APPEND:
Similar to additionalOptions you may specify either a value or reference a Secret.

### Secret References

Secret References are used by some dedicated options in the Keycloak CR, such as a tlsSecret , or as a value in additionalOptions .
Similarly ConfigMap References are used by options such as the configMapFile .
When specifying a Secret or ConfigMap Reference, make sure that a Secret or ConfigMap containing the referenced keys is present in the same namespace as the CR referencing it.
The operator will poll approximately every minute for changes to referenced Secrets or ConfigMaps. When a meaningful change is detected, the Operator performs a rolling restart of the Keycloak Deployment to pick up the changes.

### Unsupported features

The unsupported field of the CR contains highly experimental configuration options that are not completely tested and are Tech Preview.

#### Pod Template

The Pod Template is a raw API representation that is used for the Deployment Template.
This field is a temporary workaround in case no supported field exists at the top level of the CR for your use case.
The Operator merges the fields of the provided template with the values generated by the Operator for the specific Deployment.
With this feature, you have access to a high level of customizations. However, no guarantee exists that the Deployment will work as expected.
The following example illustrates injecting labels, annotations, volumes, and volume mounts:

##### Probe Configuration

The Keycloak CR exposes options to set periodSeconds and failureThreshold on each of the three probes (readiness, liveness and startup)

### Disabling required options

Keycloak and the Keycloak Operator provide the best production-ready experience with security in mind.
However, during the development phase, you can disable key security features.
Specifically, you can disable the hostname and TLS as shown in the following example:

### Resource requirements

The Keycloak CR allows specifying the resources options for managing compute resources for the Keycloak container.
It provides the ability to request and limit resources independently for the main Keycloak deployment via the Keycloak CR, and for the realm import Job via the Realm Import CR.
When no values are specified, the default requests memory is set to 1700MiB , and the limits memory is set to 2GiB .
These values were chosen based on a deeper analysis of Keycloak memory management.
If no values are specified in the Realm Import CR, it falls back to the values specified in the Keycloak CR, or to the defaults as defined above.
You can specify your custom values based on your requirements as follows:
Moreover, the Keycloak container manages the heap size more effectively by providing relative values for the heap size.
It is achieved by providing certain JVM options.
For more details, see Running Keycloak in a container .
You may control several aspects of the server Pod scheduling via the Keycloak CR. The scheduling stanza exposes optional standard Kubernetes affinity, tolerations, topology spread constraints, and the priority class name to fine tune the scheduling and placement of your server Pods.
An example utilizing all scheduling fields:
Please see the kubernetes docs for more on scheduling concepts.
If you do not specify a custom topology spread constraint, your Pods will have a spread constraint across zones and nodes to improve availability. These defaults do not affect import and update Jobs, only server Pods.

#### Job Scheduling

Realm import and update Jobs inherit the scheduling of the server Pods if it is specified in the Keycloak CR spec.scheduling field. If your server Pod scheduling is highly restrictive this may result in the
Job Pods being unschedulable. In this situation you may override the Job scheduling using the Keycloak CR spec.update.scheduling and spec.import.scheduling fields.
For example the following will remove the use of any server Pod scheduling for the update Job:

### Management Interface

To change the port of the management interface, use the first-class citizen field httpManagement.port in the Keycloak CR.
To change the properties of the management interface, you can do it by providing additionalOptions field.
You can specify the port and the additionalOptions as follows:
If you are using a custom image, the Operator is unaware of any configuration options that might’ve been specified there.
For instance, the management interface may use https , but the Operator accesses it via http when the TLS settings are specified in the custom image.
To ensure proper TLS configuration, use the tlsSecret and truststores fields in the Keycloak CR so that the Operator can reflect that.
For more details, see Configuring the Management Interface .

### Truststores

If you need to provide trusted certificates, the Keycloak CR provides a top level feature for configuring the server’s truststore as discussed in Configuring trusted certificates .
Use the truststores stanza of the Keycloak spec to specify Secrets or ConfigMaps containing PEM encoded files, or PKCS12 files with extension .p12 , .pfx , or .pkcs12 , for example:
Where the contents of my-secret could be a PEM file, for example:
When running on a Kubernetes or OpenShift environment well-known locations of trusted certificates are included automatically.
This includes /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/ca.crt and the /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-ca.crt when present.

### Admin Bootstrapping

When you create a new instance the Keycloak CR spec.bootstrapAdmin stanza may be used to configure the bootstrap user and/or service account. If you do not specify anything for the spec.bootstrapAdmin, the operator will create a Secret named "metadata.name"-initial-admin with a username temp-admin and a generated password. If you specify a Secret name for the bootstrap admin user, then the Secret will need to contain username and password key value pairs. If you specify a Secret name for bootstrap admin service account, then the Secret will need to contain client-id and client-secret key value pairs.
If a master realm has already been created for your cluster, then the spec.boostrapAdmin is effectively ignored. If you need to create a recovery admin account, then you’ll need to run the CLI command against a Pod directly.
For more information on how to bootstrap a temporary admin user or service account and recover lost admin access, refer to the Bootstrapping and recovering an admin account guide.

### Tracing (OpenTelemetry)

Tracing allows for detailed monitoring of each request’s lifecycle, which helps quickly identify and diagnose issues, leading to more efficient debugging and maintenance.
You can change tracing configuration via Keycloak CR fields as follows:
These fields should reflect 1:1 association with tracing-* options that contain more information.
The tracing-jdbc-enabled is not promoted as a first-class citizen as it might not be well managed in the future, so it needs to be set via the additionalOptions field.
For more details about tracing, see Root cause analysis with tracing .

### Network Policies

NetworkPolicies allow you to specify rules for traffic flow within your cluster, and also between Pods and the outside world.
Your cluster must use a network plugin that supports NetworkPolicy enforcement to restrict the network traffic.
The operator automatically creates a NetworkPolicy to deny access to the clustering port of your Keycloak Pods.
The HTTP(S) endpoint is open to traffic from any namespace and the outside world.
To disable the NetworkPolicy, set spec.networkPolicy.enabled in your Keycloak CR, as shown in the example below.
By default, traffic to the HTTP endpoints and the management endpoint is allowed from all sources.
The Keycloak CR can be extended to include a list of rules for each of the endpoints exposed by Keycloak.
These rules specify from where (the source) the traffic is allowed, and it is possible to communicate with the Keycloak Pods.
It defines the rules for HTTP endpoint (port 8080 by default).
Due to security reasons, the HTTP endpoint is disabled by default.
It defines the access rules for HTTPS endpoint (port 8443 by default.
It defines the access rules for management endpoint (port 9000 by default).
The management endpoint is used by the Kubernetes Probes and to expose the Keycloak metrics.
The rule syntax is the same as the one used by the Kubernetes Network Policy.
It makes it easy to migrate your existing rules into your Keycloak CP.
For more information, check the rule syntax .

#### Example with OpenShift

For a concrete example, let’s imagine we have a Keycloak deployment running in a OpenShift cluster.
Users have to access Keycloak to login, so Keycloak must be accessible from the Internet.
To make this example more interesting, let’s assume the Keycloak is monitored too.
The monitoring is enabled as described in this OpenShift documentation page: enabling Monitoring for user defined projects .
Based on those requirements, the Keycloak CR would be like this (most parts are omitted, like DB connection and security):
Enables Ingress for outside access.
The default OpenShift Ingress class pods are running in openshift-ingress namespace.
We allow traffic from these pods to access the Keycloak HTTPS endpoint.
The traffic from outside the OpenShift cluster goes through these pods.
Prometheus pods are running in openshift-user-workload-monitoring .
They need to access Keycloak to scrape the available metrics.
Check the Kubernetes Network Policies documentation for more information about NetworkPolicies.

### Parameterizing service labels and annotations

If you need to set custom labels or annotations to keycloak service you can do that through spec.http.labels and spec.http.annotations

### ServiceMonitor

A ServiceMonitor resource is used to define how a service’s metrics are discovered and scraped by Prometheus.
The Keycloak Operator automatically generates a ServiceMonitor resource for your deployment. In order for the ServiceMonitor resource to be created, the monitoring.coreos.com/v1:ServiceMonitor Custom Resource Definition (CRD)
must be installed on your Kubernetes cluster.
The Operator generates a ServiceMonitor with the following spec:
The ServiceMonitor is created with the same name as the Keycloak CR.
The ServiceMonitor is always deployed to the same namespace as the Keycloak CR and will only match a Service
in that namespace.
The configured path defaults to /metrics , but respects the http-management-relative-path value if configured.
The configured scheme is changed automatically depending on whether TLS is enabled or not.

#### Modify ServiceMonitor configuration

You can configure the interval and scrapeTimeout fields of the generated ServiceMonitor by modifying the Keycloak CR spec.

#### Disable ServiceMonitor creation

You can prevent the Operator from creating a ServiceMonitor by configuring the Keycloak CR as follows:

---
Quelle: https://www.keycloak.org/operator/advanced-configuration